
UBC STAT 540 Project Proposal - January 2015
================================================
Identifying aberrant methylation patterns underlying colorectal cancer progression
----------------

Project group members:
* Rashedul Islam
* Santina Lin
* Ka Ming Nip
* Eva Yap
* Beryl Zhuang

#### Background
Colorectal cancer (CRC) initiation and step-wise progression are associated with the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. The best-characterized epigenetic process is DNA methylation, which regulates gene transcription by covalent addition of a methyl group at the 5-carbon position of cytosine within cytosine-guanine dinucleotides (CpG). Aberrant DNA methylation can lead to malignancy by hypermethylation of CpG islands resulting in transcriptional silencing of tumour suppressor genes. CpG islands are sequences with high CpG fraction (>50%) located within gene promoters and methylation at these sites promotes association of methyl-binding proteins (MBPs) and subsequent recruitment of transcriptional repressors **(1,2)**.

Changes in DNA methylation is one of the early molecular events involved in CRC progression and many studies have identified these epigenetic abnormalities in precursor lesions such as aberrant crypt foci and adenomas **(3,4,5)**. Methylation aberrations can also mediate field defect, a phenomenon in which histologically normal tissues are predisposed to malignant transformation due to the presence of molecular alterations. For example, cancer-specific promoter methylation of the O<sup>6</sup>-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (*MGMT*) gene which encodes for a DNA repair protein was detected in normal intestinal tissues adjacent to tumours and distant normal tissues 10 cm away from tumours in CRC patients **(6)**. 

Therefore, comparison of DNA methylation patterns at the whole methylome level between normal tissues, precursor lesions, and colorectal tumours as well as comparison of tumours with paired normal tissues from CRC patients could provide further insights on the biology of CRC initiation and progression. Ultimately, these information could be translated into a clinically applicable tool which applies DNA methylation markers in early detection, risk assessment, disease monitoring, and therapeutic intervention of CRC. 

#### Project Aims
1. To compare methylation patterns between normal tissues, colon adenomas, and colorectal tumours to identify aberrantly methylated CpG islands underlying CRC progression through the normal to adenoma and adenoma to tumour sequences.
2. To compare methylation patterns between normal tissues from healthy patients and normal tissues from CRC patients to characterize DNA methylation mediators of field defect. 

#### Dataset
For our group project, we will analyze DNA methylation array data from [Series GSE48684](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE48684) generated by the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip platform [GEO Platform GPL13534](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL13534 "Platform GPL13534") with standard Illumina protocol. This dataset is publicly available on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The dataset consists of a total of 147 patient samples which are divided into four different patient groups: 

| Group |  description| sample size |
| ------------- |:-------------:| -----:|
| normal-H |  Genomic DNA from normal individuals      | 17 |
| normal-C  |    Genomic DNA of normal colon sample from CRC patients  | 24  |
| adenoma   |    Genomic DNA from adenoma patients |    42  |
| cancer |    Genomic DNA from CRC patients | 64  |

Beta value, the estimation of methylation level by the ratio of methylated intensity and control intensity, were recorded for 485577 probes. The beta values have been normalized by SWAN **(7)** and corrected for batch effect by Combat **(8)**. 
The tissue samples were taken from colorectal mucosa. The metadata, such as gender, cancer stage, colon region where the sample was taken from, and protocols used were also recorded.


#### Proposed Methods
As revealed by the corresponding [GEO Platform GPL13534](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GPL13534 "Platform GPL13534"), a total of 485,577 HumanMethylation450 probes were used in this study. Given our limited computational resources and time, we opt for downsizing the number of probes to those (150,254) that hybridize to CpG islands, which are widely studied and shown to be biologically relevant in cancer progression as discussed earlier. In addition, we are excluding chromosome X from our analyses because one copy of chromosome X in every female would have chromosome-wide methylation at CpG sites **(9,11)**.

In the first phase of our project, we want to do a sanity check on the on the quality of the data. We will perform unsupervised hierarchical [clustering analysis](http://www.statmethods.net/advstats/cluster.html) on our data to see if samples from the same patient groups are clustered together. If the majority of the samples are correctly clustered in the same patient groups, the analysis could suggest that the few ones that are incorrectly clustered could be potential sample-swaps or outliers. If our clustering analysis fails to correctly group the samples from the same groups together, it would suggest that the beta values of a large numbers of our probes do not significnatly differ between groups. 

We will then perform normalization on our data and then clustering analysis to see if the results differ. To further examine the data prior to the group comparison analysis, we will also examine covariance across the samples, assuming that samples in the same patient groups have strong co-variance.

In order to do group comparison between the methylation data of the normal tissues, adenomas, and colorectal tumour, we will perform several statistical tests, including ANOVA and differential expression analysis by the Bioconductor package limma**(10)** and extract differentially methylated genes for further analysis. To examine the different stages of CRC progression, we will do two group comparisons for the following pairs:
- normal-C  and normal-H: to investigate whether the two groups are differentially methylated, and what are the regions. This could reveal whether normal tissue from patients with CRC have different epigenomics compared to normal tissues from healthy individuals. 
- normal-H+nomal-C and adenoma : to investigate if any regions become differently methylated in the progression from normal tissue to development of adenoma.  
- adenoma and cancer : to see, if any, which probes indicate different methylation levels between the two groups. This information could reveal possible epigenomics changes as adenoma progresses to CRC. 

We will do functional enrichment analysis on the top-hit candidate genes as part of our Aim #1. By examining the pathways these genes are part of, it could help us evaluate our analysis results and whether epigenomics play an important role in CRC.

#### Tentative work and assignments 

1. **Data processing and prefiltering** - Ka Ming and Beryl
	- Prepare scripts to download data and filtering data
	- Describe data structures and sizes 
	- Create metadata and aggregating data
	- Data normalization and transformation 

2. **Clustering analysis for before and after data processing** - Santina and Eva
	- Research on different clustering methods in R 
	- Summarize and analyze clustering analysis 

3. **Limma and differential expression analysis** - Ka Ming, Rashedul, Santina
	- Perform differential expression analysis by doing different group comparisons
	- Literature research on top hit genes suggested by Limma 

4. **Functional enrichment analysis** - Beryl, Eva, Rashedul 
	- Research on gene functions and pathways 

5. **Prepare poster** - all group members

#### References
1. Li, Jiaqiu, Hongchuan Jin, and Xian Wang. "Epigenetic Biomarkers: Potential Applications in Gastrointestinal Cancers." ISRN gastroenterology 2014 (2014).
APA	
2. Vaiopoulos, Aristeidis G., Kalliopi Ch Athanasoula, and Athanasios G. Papavassiliou. "Epigenetic modifications in colorectal cancer: molecular insights and therapeutic challenges." Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Molecular Basis of Disease 1842.7 (2014): 971-980.
3. Luo, Yanxin, et al. "Differences in DNA methylation signatures reveal multiple pathways of progression from adenoma to colorectal cancer." Gastroenterology 147.2 (2014): 418-429.
4. Chan, Annie On-On, et al. "CpG island methylation in aberrant crypt foci of the colorectum." The American journal of pathology 160.5 (2002): 1823-1830.
5. Muto, Yuta, et al. "DNA methylation alterations of AXIN2 in serrated adenomas and colon carcinomas with microsatellite instability." BMC cancer 14.1 (2014): 466.
6. Shen, Lanlan, et al. "MGMT promoter methylation and field defect in sporadic colorectal cancer." Journal of the National Cancer Institute 97.18 (2005): 1330-1338.
7. Maksimovic, Jovana, Lavinia Gordon, and Alicia Oshlack. "SWAN: Subset-quantile within array normalization for illumina infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips." Genome Biol 13.6 (2012): R44.
8. Johnson, W. Evan, Cheng Li, and Ariel Rabinovic. "Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods." Biostatistics 8.1 (2007): 118-127.
9. Yasukochi, Yukio, et al. "X chromosome-wide analyses of genomic DNA methylation states and gene expression in male and female neutrophils." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107.8 (2010): 3704-3709.
10. Smyth, Gordon K. "Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments." Statistical applications in genetics and molecular biology 3.1 (2004): 1-25.
11. Andrew J. Sharp, Elisavet Stathaki, Eugenia Migliavacca, Manisha Brahmachary, Stephen B. Montgomery, Yann Dupre, and Stylianos E. Antonarakis. "DNA methylation profiles of human active and inactive X chromosomes." Genome Res. 2011 Oct; 21(10): 1592–1600.
